[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LILOU: Hello, my
beautiful co-creators.
Lilou here in Yucatan in
Mexico at the Hotel Okaan
in the middle of
the jungle, really,
really next to Chichén
Itzá with Lucy.
Hello, Lucy.
>>LUCY ROMERO: Hello, Lilou.
Very, very happy to be
with you and the cameras
and to say hello to
all your audience.
>>LILOU: Well, thank you for
coming all the way from Mexico.
Because we're here in
this beautiful paradise.
And I'm happy that
I flew to France.
And here we are having this
conversation on consciousness,
this juicy conversation.
Because you're an author.
You were a TV host, too.
I mean, you had what a life.
Tell us about your background.
>>ROMERO: Oh, yes.
Well, you know, life jumps
in a very unexpected way.
I began as a psychologist.
I am doing clinical psychologist
work for more than 30 years.
But suddenly one point of my
career, a friend of mine who
was a director of an important
broadcasting radio station,
she asked me to make some little
capsules about the couple.
Because I have a major
in couple therapy.
So I began like this, and then
I jumped to international TV
working for Univision in Miami.
And then I worked for
international radio, Caracol,
which is from Colombia.
So I am very happy.
And now I am in
there every Monday
in radio, W Radio,
radio 96.9 FM.
And I am very happy, because
working for the radio
and for media is a way to spread
through many, many people that
could never reach a
private consultation.
That's why I love
to work for media.
>>LILOU: Yeah, and there's so
much to talk about with you.
Because your website
is actually in Spanish.
But thanks to
Google Translate, I
got to see a little
bit of your work.
And I'm excited to discover it
as everybody is going to listen
right now to this conversation.
But you talk about the goddess.
We could speak about so
many things, the couple,
the goddess, jealousy.
But I really would love to
speak about your heritage.
Because you're wearing
this beautiful outfit.
Tell us about it.
Because we're here
really in Mexico.
We're really here
where the Mayans are
and there is so much history.
Tell us about--
>>ROMERO: Well, I love
this kind of costume
because it belongs to Oaxaca,
one of the most creative places
in the country.
And it's hand-embroidered.
I mean, everything that
people are looking at
is hand-embroidered.
And it means-- it is kind of
a expression of femininity.
And here at the Mayan
place, which is Okaan.
Okaan is a gorgeous
place because it's
very close to Chichen Itza.
And this land is
empowering for women.
And why it's empowering
for women, because they
said that, in
Mesoamerican cultures,
they said that if the
woman could deliver
a baby in this part
of the country,
the baby will be blessed.
Because all the
southeast of the country
is ruled by a very,
very strong goddess.
And its name is Ixchel.
So any little boy or girl born
here was absolutely blessed.
And why this land is so
important, because meanwhile,
this is the southeast
of the country
is the first part
of the country that
received the sun all year long.
So the sun is raising and
coming into the country
through these lands.
And these lands are
extremely feminine.
So any woman who comes
here feels gorgeous.
[LAUGHS]
>>LILOU: I love that.
And yet, this place also
brings up some stuff in us.
>>ROMERO: Absolutely.
>>LILOU: It's part
of the process.
>>ROMERO: it's part of the
process, and mainly in Okaan
because Okaan is a very special
place because it's built
inside, inside the jungle.
And it's very difficult that
you have so much facilities
inside the jungle.
I mean, the jungle was
absolutely preserved.
So jungle is something
that the first two
days has to embrace you because
of the sounds, the smell.
Some are much little crickets
in the night that awake you.
But at the third day,
you feel like blossoming
from inside to outside.
So that's why you feel like--
sometimes when I
do workshops here
I prefer to allow all the
audience and the students
to really relax and do some
meditation and vegetarian
food before we begin
with whatever we have.
Because they have to adapt
themselves to the jungle.
The jungle has to embrace you.
And you have to relax in it.
And then that that it
happens, miracles comes up.
>>LILOU: I know you speak
a lot of the serpent, too.
We had this conversation.
Let's get into it.
What does the
serpent inspires you?
>>ROMERO: Oh, well, one
of my bestseller books
is We Are Goddesses.
And We Are Goddesses,
I made an analysis
what's happened with the
symbol of the serpent.
Because for Mayan
culture, serpent
is a wonderful, very,
very strong and wonderful,
meaningful symbol.
And for the Christians
there is evil.
It is the sin.
It is the sinner the ones
who are close to snakes.
So it was like,
in my mind, what's
going on with this strong symbol
that is the snake, the serpent?
And the serpent is a very
powerful symbol for all women.
Because all around the
world, not just in Mexico--
let me tell you,
the Sumerians, they
have a strong
feminine figure that
has in both hands the snakes.
Because the snake was
a symbol for wisdom,
was a symbol for
medicine, was a symbol
for death and life
and recovering.
You know that some snakes,
they change their whole--
the transformation in the
middle of their lives.
They change the skin.
So it's a very deep
symbol for we women.
Because there is a
moment in women's
life in which we have
to transform ourselves
as a butterfly or as a snake.
Those are the two symbols
of transformation for women.
>>LILOU: So what's
the difference,
you would say, transforming
into a snake versus a butterfly?
>>ROMERO: OK, the snake just
take her own skin and leave it.
And it's very interesting,
because if you see it
in the jungle, sometimes
you can find it.
And you feel-- you
see even though it's
totally transparent.
It's like if the
skeleton goes down.
And then she recovers and
has a second life, too.
And the butterfly is a
total transformation.
It's from the caterpillar
that the caterpillar,
it is a point in her life that
she really intoxicates herself
with her own products, and from
that builds up like a cocoon.
And we women need
to have a cocoon
once in our life, a cocoon
to make the transformation.
And from there, they
come the imaginal selves.
Imaginal selves
are the self that
has the power and the project
of being totally, totally
different, 100%.
And that's the moment in
which we women are all
around the world.
Now is the time for women to
really be what we had never
been before in our memory.
Because the societies who really
have the empowerment of women,
it was in 1200 before
Christ in Crete,
the Minoic Creta in Greece.
And that was the
last civilization
who has a clear balance
between man and woman.
They worked together
deciding and proposing.
And later on, woman
was devastated,
because the barbaric
tribes who came and killed,
they really were very, very
afraid about feminine power.
So they call us, which
is they call us a malady.
They call us that we are cursed.
And then they put
our symbol of power,
who was the snake, as the sin.
And then they took the virgin,
just the virginal woman,
was the one who
was going to step
into the head of the serpent.
But why the serpent, the
snake, turns into that poison
kind of symbol, it was
because the power of the women
must be defeated.
And now you see all around the
world there are many men who
are afraid of feminine power.
And this is not the clue point.
The clue point is that men
recover inside themselves
their own feminine energy.
Because we do have, as a woman,
we do have masculine energy.
And they do have
feminine energy.
So we have to
allow them to arise
their own profound
feminine energy
and embrace it as a woman
and then recover our way
to speak aloud our voice, which
is the change for the world.
>>LILOU: When does
that transformation
take place in one's life?
>>ROMERO: Well, it is
sometimes after 35.
Between 35 and 45, we women
went into that transformation.
And I like-- did you see
that movie about Alice
in Wonderland, the
one of Tim Burton?
>>LILOU: Yeah.
>>ROMERO: OK, this is a perfect
story about the transformation.
It's so beautifully described.
Because he altered a little
bit the original script
of Lewis Carroll.
And he turns it into a profound
story about this girl who
doesn't want to be what
her mother and her society
push her to be and
meant her to be.
And then she ran.
And in that moment, she
found the little rabbit
and went into the rabbit hole.
And then it comes
the phrase, how deep
do you want to go
into the rabbit hole?
Which means, how deep do you
want to go into your own story,
into that big question
that the caterpillar-- you
remember the caterpillar in the
movie that says, who are you?
And she drives mad.
She cannot answer "who am I?"
until the end of the story,
which is just beautiful.
>>LILOU: So how long are
we ready to go deep inside?
Is this journey a must for
one's liberation or one person
to live fully?
Is it one journey
that really takes
a long time and that
is meant to go really
deep, and a bit scary, yeah?
>>ROMERO: Well, I think
that each woman has--
more than liberation, more
than freedom, is awakening.
Awakening the power.
And the power is not a
power of confrontation.
It is not like the feminist.
I adore the feminist woman.
But I am not one of those.
Because I knew that
they really confront
very difficult and strong
society in which woman
was really pulled down.
And for many, many centuries,
more than 1,500 years,
if you were born as
a woman, your destiny
was absolutely craft.
You cannot change
anything on your destiny.
But now I could say, since the
half part of the last century,
at least in Occident-- because
in Orient, I am really sorry,
but they are still
suffering very, very much
a patriarchal destiny that we're
collapsing the feminine energy.
But now we in the West, we
really can improve ourselves.
How far?
As far as we
allowed it to do it.
>>LILOU: Is that journey also,
for you, part of going back
into our own ancestors?
Because I guess
it's been going on
for generations and generations.
So how does that work?
>>ROMERO: Yes, well--
>>LILOU: Can we
release that much?
>>ROMERO: Absolutely.
The psychological studies
about the fields, the fields
that are--
this is the systemic psychology
that is running in the top now
that belongs to
transpersonal psychology
and has a strong base in physics
and a strong base in biology
with Rupert Sheldrake
kind of work.
And then we know
that we really have
to be very grateful
to our mothers
and grandmothers and
grand-grandmothers' ancestors.
But say, I love
you, I respect you,
but I am willing to
take my own destiny.
So I am asking you to bless me.
Because I am not
going to be like you.
I am not going to take the
decisions that you took.
And now I fully embrace my
era and the destiny of the era
that I was born.
But thank you very, very much
from the deepest of my heart.
I honor you, all my ancestors,
all my women ancestors.
Because of you I am now here.
>>LILOU: Beautiful
act of love, huh?
>>ROMERO: Yes, yes.
And each one of us has to do it.
It doesn't matter--
>>LILOU: Men and women, here?
>>ROMERO: Absolutely,
men and woman,
we have to do it
if we really want
to develop a society in which
we can make decisions together
and we can develop
another kind of view
for society in which we are
not so prompt to have the rat
race of power and the
rat race of totally
competition and confrontation.
We are more like
bounding and honoring.
It doesn't matter who you are.
It doesn't matter
what do you do.
I know that what you
do and what you are,
it is perfect because
it's part of the creation.
But I, myself, too--
it doesn't matter if my work
is to prepare some sandwiches
in the morning for the
children, or to wash dishes
in a restaurant all
day long, or if I
am a very high scientific
woman or a leader or a writer
or whatever.
All women deserve the same
honor, and all men, too.
But we have to make
that kind of change.
I have to tell you something.
The other day I went to a
very important congress here
in Mexico, in Puebla.
And one of the lecturers, a
very strong and intelligent man,
I asked him, what
would we women have
to do in order to
make our voice to be
listened in the scenarios that
take decisions for the world.
And he said, this is one of
the most important things.
If we really want, that
society makes a jump,
makes the quantum
leap, to really
offer to the next
generations something better.
And I really enjoy that a man
so strong and powerful and wise
like him said something so deep.
Because it means that even
in the very high circles
of thinkers, they know
that the feminine arising
of the energy in men
and women is absolutely
required if we want to
go further in evolution
for society, for human society.
>>LILOU: And I hear a lot--
so the forgiveness is a big
part of this, a big chunk
in this process of evolution.
What are the different things?
What are the different
components for our society,
do you feel, to go
from this patriarchal
to this more feminine energy?
>>ROMERO: Well,
the first part is
to acknowledge and to
recognize that for 3,000 years
we had been collapsed
and imposed.
And there are many, many
places around the world
in which the machismo or
the patriarchal society
are still very, very
violent against women.
Daily we have noticed
in news around the world
in different media that takes
care about what is going
on with violence against women.
So we have to overcome that.
The first part, I would say,
is like a kind of cleansing.
>>LILOU: A cleansing, yeah.
>>ROMERO: A cleansing,
like a cleansing of,
I am going to say
yes, it happens.
You cannot go over a perpetrator
if you jump over saying
forgiveness, if you don't
first say, I am looking at you,
and I am telling you
that it happened.
And once that we
can do that, then we
have the strength to
allow ourselves to speak.
Because what's
happened is that--
I've been working 30
years with a lot of women
around the country and
in different countries.
And what I've found is that
if you confront them and say--
OK, listen, tell me
what do you want--
they paralyze.
They are not that sure
of what they want.
Because nobody has
asked them before.
What we have to be and
to do was pre-designed
before we were born,
the expectation.
So now that we
have that-- that's
why we are going in
pendulous kind of movements.
We jump from one
part to another part.
What for?
Because we are trying
to find our own center.
And once that we are
centered, then we
can say, OK, now I have
to articulate the language
to say and to express
what do I want.
Not in a confrontational way,
not in a very rebellion way,
because this is
the same old thing.
So we're not going to go
anywhere if we are just
going in that line.
So we have to
articulate a language.
And once a woman is centered
in her own being, I mean,
it's so authentic.
Lilou, it is amazing, amazing.
When I have a circle of
women and I allow them just
to express themselves
after a cleansing,
I am bowing in front of them.
There is so much wisdom.
Even the woman that is the
cleaning woman in your house,
she has so much wisdom.
Because she's a mother.
She fed with her breast.
She carry in the nights
the fever of the children.
So the only thing is to
allow them to be authentic
and to say, it's
fine to be authentic,
and I am here to listen to you.
To listen to you, what
are your feelings?
What are your desires?
That kind of opening,
that kind of bowing.
>>LILOU: So it's great,
because then you give them
also the opportunity to speak.
And that's part of the process.
Or do we have--
because sometimes we
need the permission, huh?
It's hard to give ourselves
that permission, isn't it?
>>ROMERO: Yes, that's
why we need first
to let out the anger.
First, you have to go,
to cross over submission.
Because submission is
the first reaction.
In my book, We are
Goddesses, I talk
really deep about
that, for a long time,
we women are a
second class society.
And when you have a second class
society for a long, long time,
it comes like second skin that
people cannot overcome easily.
So we have first to
rest and to allow
them to overcome submission.
Then will come rebellion.
And then from rebellion
and submission,
then it comes into
a very authentic way
of allowing themselves to
express something different,
something that is not
in the environment.
I mean, when we women really
join together and make
serious proposals, we're talking
from another different point
of view.
That we don't have a memory
that it had happened.
And now I am feeling that is an
opening in different scenarios.
Like entrepreneurs all
around the word-- well,
not all around the world,
but at least in the West--
you see that entrepreneurs and
directors in big enterprises
are at least 50% women.
And the same in science, in art.
So you have different
scenarios in which
women are flowering, emerging,
and doing their own thing.
And then people are turning.
Unfortunately, not in politics.
In politics, we still
have small places.
And there are just few
countries around the world
which had a president or a
first minister as a woman.
But I think that we are in a
very, very good position right
now.
Yes.
>>LILOU: There is also,
I guess, not this anger,
but there is something to
be released in the process.
And women are very
intuitive, right?
And we feel things.
And sometimes it might
be difficult to make
the difference between our
intuitions and the past things
that we have lived or inherited
from past generations.
So how can we make
the difference
of how to know what's really
good for us in the end,
and how to make the
right decisions,
and that we're not-- sometimes
we feel crazy, don't we?
I mean, we have the
hormones, everything working.
[LAUGHTER]
>>ROMERO: Well, let me tell
you, first, it is just 20,
25 years ago that
intuition is not
related with madness
or hysterical process.
So we have to acknowledge that.
We have to acknowledge that
now the word intuition is
welcome in different kind of
talking and serious talking.
And you could say,
I have a hunch,
and people could pay attention.
But for a long time,
you have a hunch,
you are stupid because
you cannot have a reason.
Intuition is to know without
knowing why you know.
So it could be very close
to craziness or stupidity
from the Cartesian
kind of thinking--
very, very going to the
point and from A to B to Z.
And then, if you use
it your intuition,
you go from A to Z. Yes,
and nobody understands that.
So now that we can
say, I have a hunch,
and then some people
could say, yes, OK,
I want to hear your hunch,
what it's all about.
And then they keep an eye on--
they look if it works or not.
And now we are allowing
ourselves to go further.
For a long time, to say
something like that,
it was like you deserve to
be burned in [INAUDIBLE]..
You deserve to be in a jail.
You deserve to be
treated like a witch.
It's a heretic thing to
do by the Inquisition.
So those are very, very deep,
hidden scars in your heart,
in women's heart.
Because we have our own
heritage for our mothers
and grandmothers and
fathers and lineage.
But we have the
unconscious memory
that is a cellular thing.
And these cellular
things jump and pop up.
I work with women who, even
though their fathers were
very nice and their
husbands or colleagues,
when they have a big boss that
jails them, they paralyze.
And their heart again, bumping
like this, and they paralyze.
And they cannot act.
And they feel in the throat
there is like a kind of knot,
and they cannot
articulate the language.
And this is not because
their own story.
Because they didn't have
that in her childhood.
But because it's a
memory for ancient times
that we have in ourselves.
So we have to overcome all this.
And I think that men will
be very happy for that.
Because they are tired, too.
They are tired of
being just the heroes
or being just the one who has
to carry on everything in terms
and in order.
>>LILOU: They're
probably tired, too,
of having bossy women
that are so masculine
and running them around,
which is not really
the nature of woman.
I mean, I feel the
nature of woman
and the feminine is the
receiving and the beingness
and this kind of roundness.
>>ROMERO: Yes.
Yes, well, what you
are talking about
is what in Jungian
psychology would
call that animus possessed.
Animus possessed is a
woman that is unconsciously
possessed by the masculine
energy of her own psyche.
So she performs like a
man, but she's a woman.
So in doing that,
she feels powerful.
She feels strength.
But deep, deep down, she
is never happy with that.
Because in long-term, she cannot
have true men close to her.
She will have a man
that she submit.
And they are kind
of obedient to her.
But this is around fear and
being threatened by the woman.
And we have to
overcome from that.
And the attributes of
the feminine energy
for all the world,
not just for women,
is beauty, is
sensuous, is elegance.
Because the Mayan
culture is so elegant.
Women here are so powerful.
You see them so
strong, so well-seated
with these beautiful costumes
and with her face so elegantly
happy and proud of themselves.
>>LILOU: They had their place
yesterday, I saw a ceremony.
And it was exactly that.
They were just really
as present as men were.
>>ROMERO: Yes, yes.
>>LILOU: It was a
big deal ceremony,
and they were there
just doing their thing
and doing their
prayer and bringing
in the incense
and the cleansing.
>>ROMERO: Yes, it is an
experience of a deep balance
between the two energies
and then is like expanding
of the heart, having some
kind of deep feeling of--
I don't want to
say trust or hope,
because it's something
that is already there.
It's not something that
we are going to achieve.
It's something that
is already there.
We just have to turn to see that
kind of relation and to say,
OK, I'm going to take it for me.
And I am going to
go deep inside of me
and to do what I have to do.
I mean, if I need therapy, if
I need Reiki, if I need tarot,
if I need to go to university
and have a degree, if I just
need to spend some time in the
middle of the jungle like this
in Okaan, I am going to
do whatever is required.
But I don't want to die as a
woman living somebody else's
life.
Because two centuries ago, they
decided what a woman should be.
It's that kind of
empowerment that we need,
and then to join, to
join in a good mood
and in a good side
with another woman.
Because you know
something, Lilou?
Unfortunately, the
biggest enemy for a woman
is another woman,
for a long time.
Because we were-- and it
is very understandable
from the psychological
point of view.
Because if you belong to
a second class society,
then you have to go in like this
to have a little bit of breadth
into the first society.
And if you have to step
over the shoulders of one
of your colleagues that is
a woman and take her work
and put it under your name,
you're going to do it.
Because otherwise you don't want
to belong to the second class
society.
So that's the things that
we have to really be aware.
That's why I talk about
a process of awakening.
It's a process of awakening.
>>LILOU: How do you picture
that process of awakening?
Is that just like from the
heart emanating and opening up,
or is that--
how do you visualize it?
How can we see it?
>>ROMERO: I visualize it like
saying to yourself, first,
what you don't want
anymore in your life.
And if you don't want violence,
don't tolerate violence,
and don't be violent.
If you don't want to
relate with somebody--
it doesn't matter who
is that somebody-- that
jails you, that criticizes
you, you don't deal with that.
You say, I am going
to do whatever
I have to do to be over that.
But you have to do the same.
You cannot ask for good
daily treatment and you being
a bitch, threatening
people, bitchy kind of, OK?
So first, you have to
do something like that,
which is a very difficult step.
And second, you have to be
productive for yourself.
Because there is a trilogy that
men, that patriarchal society,
are using to control women
since 3,000 years ago.
The first is sex.
They controlled our
sex for a long time.
The second is money, economy.
And the third is logos.
Logos means that we women for
a long time thought that we
cannot understand the world if
it is not by the words of a man
or men that explain
the world to us.
So the world has meaning
as long as a men tell
you what is the world.
Because we were so devastated
in that terrible time
that the barbaric
orgs exterminate
the balanced society.
It is very well written
in a book that I adore
and I recommend to
everybody who is listening.
It's "The Chalice
and the Sword."
And it's by Riane Eisler.
She's a terrific writer.
And Marija Gimbutas,
she did a terrible work
talking about societies that
were different than the one
that we are living now.
And that's why now
we are in the time
that these kind of
societies are as strong.
So these three ways
of controlling us,
sex, we overcome sex
when we have the pill.
So the pill allowed us to have
sex without the risk of being--
>>LILOU: Oh, the period.
>>ROMERO: Yes.
>>LILOU: I heard "the peel."
>>ROMERO: No, the pill.
>>LILOU: Oh, the pill, the
pill, the contraceptive pill.
>>ROMERO: Yes, the
contraceptive pill.
Why?
Because before,
every relation, you
have the risk to be pregnant.
And if you are
pregnant, you could die.
Because I mean, a lot of women
died before the penicillin,
the penicillin and the
aseptic environment
around the delivery room.
A lot of women died
from a puerperal fever.
So we women had a lot of fear
that get pregnant easily.
So the liberation,
the freedom of that,
became with the
contraceptive pill.
The second is the money.
Men still now control
women with money.
Because why?
Because we need the money
to feed our children.
And if we don't have
the experience of I
am strong enough to produce
my own living, which
happens to a lot of
women around the world,
then they control by
the power of money.
And the third,
which is the logos.
Now we women are allowing
ourselves to say, hey,
may I raise my hand?
I have an opinion.
But it was not that way.
Remember Schopenhauer saying
that women are creatures
with long hair and short ideas.
And Schopenhauer, one of
the biggest philosophers
of the last part of the century.
>>LILOU: So much-- not damage,
but there is a lot of, then,
when we hear that, you're
like, oh my goodness.
It raises a lot of
thoughts and a lot of--
as you said, we cannot move
forward with the same way that
things have moved
forward right now.
So really the intuition
is one of those tools.
And what else?
>>ROMERO: Intuition--
>>LILOU: Forgiveness--
>>ROMERO: Intuition first.
Second, acknowledge our state.
Third, give an honor
to our ancestors.
And then understanding
that patriarchal society
has good points, too.
Because they gave law.
They gave the structure.
They gave a science.
They gave technicians.
But now it's our turn.
I mean, it's not
something that now we
are going to devastate
the whole-- no.
On the contrary, we
are going to step on
for building a new society.
So I think that each woman
has to do their own path.
And the ways are
always, always at hand.
There is no woman
that really wants
to awake that could not step on
her own toes and turn her head.
And then things will arise by
synchronicity, by intuition,
by reading, by
friends, by programs
like yours that all
the time are talking
about all these new
evolution, and by the joining
of the heart in the project
of developing a new society.
But new society begins
with each one of us,
then with your couple,
then with your children.
If you can rescue
this little self,
then you will rescue
the whole society.
Don't think to jump in big,
big, big, massive scenarios
if you do not begin
by your own selves.
>>LILOU: Loving ourselves, huh?
>>ROMERO: Loving
ourselves and allowing
ourselves to express and
to go through whatever
it is required.
Because Lilou, we
are going to die.
And it's wonderful that we
are going to die and confront
our own death with a smile
and say, oh, you know,
I took from life everything
that belongs to me--
everything--
everything including
suffering, pain,
but joy, but bliss,
but experience, and
laughter and dance.
>>LILOU: You're a Mexican woman.
And I'm sure all women
listening to this can relate.
It's a global society.
Transformation is
happening everywhere.
Do you feel that there is
something special that Mexico
is bringing that this
land or this earth--
I heard often it's
the [SPANISH]..
But do you have
something to say?
>>ROMERO: Absolutely.
We have to understand
that this country has
the most powerful kind
of ancient sanctuaries
all around the world.
If you take--
I did it.
I already did it.
If you take the
map of the Republic
and you just point a little,
little point in all the centers
that are around the country,
it will come full of dots.
Pyramids are from the center
to the southeast, covering.
I went to the museum.
Now we have in Madera
a marvelous new museum.
It is a museum for the
ancient Mayan culture.
And it's a beautiful
architectural building.
And if you go there, there
is a map of the peninsula.
And they put yellow light,
and when you push the button
and you see the light, you
say, I cannot believe that.
I mean, the government
has not enough money
to discover and to take the
jungle from all the pyramids.
But we are full of pyramids.
>>LILOU: Yet the richest man
on the planet is Mexican.
>>ROMERO: Oh, yes.
>>LILOU: So there is, there is--
>>ROMERO: Yes, there
is a lot of energy.
And now is like, I once had a
kind of dream, an image that I
saw each one of these
pyramids around the country
was bumping bumping,
palpitating.
And when the Tibetan culture
was destroyed by the Chinese,
it was like it was a flip-flop.
Because the Tibetans
was a culture
that has 1/3 of their own
population praying and living
in monasteries.
But when they were
devastated in '59,
when His Holiness the Dalai
Lama went to India to Dharamsala
to be as a refugee because
President [INAUDIBLE]
allowed him, it was
like a collapsing
off of a very important
pole in the equilibrium
of the energies, the spiritual
energies of the whole planet.
And now this is making a
flip-flop that comes from
the Patagonia, goes to
Peru to Machu Picchu,
and then comes to all the
Maya entrance from the Central
America--
Belize, Honduras, Guatamala.
And then it comes to Chiapas
Quintana Roo Yucatan.
And then it comes to
Campeche and to Tabasco.
And it covers part
of Mitla in Oaxaca.
So all this part of a very
strong energy is pulling up--
>>LILOU: Kundalini
of the earth, is
that what you're referring to?
>>ROMERO: Uh huh,
that's what they say,
that this is the
Kundalini of the earth.
And now they have very
strong discoveries
in the center in Mexico
City, the Templo Mayor.
The Templo Major was the
hidden part of the Aztecs
that the conquerors, the
Spaniards, destroyed the top.
And on the top of
it, they built up
the big Zocalo and the great
cathedral that we have.
But in the last 20
years, more and more
of the Templo Mayor are coming.
and what we are discovering
is amazing, including the
beautiful Coyolxauhqui.
And Coyolxauhqui was that
goddess that was thrown out.
And she splitted in her body.
But the legend said
that there will
be a time in which Coyolxauhqui
will recover her members,
because her legs and
arms wide were broken,
and she will recover.
And all are those myths of
recovering the feminine.
>>LILOU: That's the
question I had earlier.
And I'm glad you said that.
Because calling forth
for that goddess,
right, is part of
also what we can do?
We're not alone in this process.
I guess we can ask
her for some help.
>>ROMERO: Absolutely,
absolutely.
And we have this strong figure
here in Yucatan that is Ixchel.
And Ixchel-- I am a fanatic of
stories of the different kind
of goddesses around the world.
Because one of my training
was for a long time
to study Jungian psychology.
And Jung was the
one, the first one,
who made a parallel with
the mythological part
of the cultures around the
world and the life itself
of his own patients.
And there is a kind of therapy
that we do with mythical.
We call that mythical parallels.
And one day I was talking
with one very important
Canadian psychologist.
And I asked her, I would
like to study the pantheon
from the Greeks.
And she said, don't do that.
You're Mexican.
You have to study
the Mexican pantheon.
And Ixchel is one of
the strongest women
representatives,
because she goes
from the very young girl,
six, seven years old,
until the elder.
So she makes a conjunction
that we have splitted.
In Greek mythology, we have
Hera and we have Persephone.
And we have Demeter.
But in Mexican culture, for
the Mayas, we have Ixchel.
And Ixchel has the
whole pantheon.
And it's very easy
to just Google it.
>>LILOU: How do you spell it?
>>ROMERO: Ixchel is I-X-C--
I have to write it
down to spell it.
Ixchel, Ixchel-- OK,
I-X-C-H-E-L, Ixchel.
When she is young,
she is like a student.
And she learned how to
handle all the elements.
She knows how to
handle the water, how
to prepare the healing
power of the herbs,
and how to work with the skin
of the animals, the feather
of the beautiful birds, and
how to work with the stones.
One of the main stones in
that part of the country
is turquoise.
And they heal with jade
and with turquoise.
So she is a master
during her childhood
until she's around
35 or something.
Then she turns into the
most magical, seductive,
beautiful woman.
She's powerful.
She's sexy.
She can perform all type of
sex with all type of men, yes.
And we have the Lacandon
sex rites, which
are a tantric thing that--
one day we will make
good with Alberto.
He knows a lot about
Lacondon sex rites.
>>LILOU: That's another video,
my beautiful co-creators.
>>ROMERO: Yes.
>>LILOU: We could
speak for hours.
>>ROMERO: Yes, my dear.
And then let me close
Ixchel with you.
And then once she passed
over all this period,
a woman of being very sexy
and very seductive and very
beautiful.
And she dresses with all
kinds of feathers and pearls
and whatever she puts on
her body, everything just
to beauty, beauty that every
man could go on the floor
just to see her.
>>LILOU: So thank
you so much, Lucy.
It was so amazing meeting you.
I'm so excited.
We could do this for
hours, couldn't we?
>>ROMERO: Oh, yes.
We women, when we open our
heart, it happens, Lilou.
And I am so happy that
finally this was a destiny.
Because we couldn't meet
five years ago, and now
it comes into turn.
So I am very, very grateful to
you and to all your audience,
absolutely.
>>LILOU: And you write
many, many books.
And you have your website.
Can you remind us of
that so that people
that want to search more of this
deep knowledge that you have?
Because you have so
much information.
I love when women really you
have all this information.
It's incredible to listen to.
>>ROMERO: Oh, thank
you very much.
My website is
www.lucyromero.com.mx.
And don't forget the mx, OK?
>>LILOU: And you can always
use Google Translate.
There is always that option.
Because it's in Spanish,
your website, for now.
>>ROMERO: Oh,
thank you very much
that you advise me to do that
Google thing into English.
I will be doing as soon
as I arrive to Mexico.
Thank you.
>>LILOU: Thank you, Lucy.
And thank you to all beautiful
co-creators creators watching.
Thank you for
sharing these videos.
And we send you lots of
love from beautiful Okaan
in Yucatan.
>>ROMERO: Big kisses,
and we wait for you here.
Bye-bye.
[MUSIC PLAYING]